###### On billionaires, groceries, The National Health Service, wind power, Kurt Vonnegut
# Letters to the editor 
> Dec 7th 2019 
The political left gets many things wrong, but by identifying billionaires as a “policy failure” they are exactly right. As you say, on average billionaires inherit one-fifth of their wealth (“In defence of billionaires”, November 9th). These transfer payments are unrelated to any effort or talent. Therefore, high inheritance taxes would not just be “welcome” but are necessary for a well-functioning capitalist system. Furthermore, the inequality of income and, more importantly, wealth, is a disincentive for the vast majority of individuals who can’t expect to be millionaires when they are toddlers (hello, Donald Trump). Research has shown that inequality can suppress economic growth. 
William Nordhaus conflates billionaires and innovators when he says that the latter collect only 2% of the value they create. To the extent that billionaires have made their fortunes in property, where corruption abounds, or in finance, where “innovations” can remove vast amounts of value in crises, this argument falls flat. 
KENNETH REINERTProfessor of public policyGeorge Mason UniversityArlington, Virginia 
You condemned George Lucas for the money he made by selling Lucasfilm to Disney, reasoning that it rewards him for “Star Wars”, a film he made over 40 years ago. However, the price Disney paid was for the commercial behemoth (I purposely avoid the word empire here) created through the life of the franchise. The fact that the Star Wars brand has flourished and is still evident in everyday life (the Pentagon’s JEDI contract being a good example) is testament to the creativity and ingenuity of the firm that Mr Lucas created. Indeed, in your next issue you glorified Disney’s new streaming service offering “Star Wars” and described the sale of Lucasfilm as benefiting the consumer through more choice and lower prices (“Power to the people”, November 16th). 
I’m perplexed by your zig-zag approach. In one edition Disney’s takeover of Lucasfilm is rent-seeking profiteering, in the next it is good for the consumer. I agree with the second argument. Mr Lucas generated a great amount of entertainment for millions and deserves his reward. 
TIM KILPATRICKBrussels 
Taxes on the rich do not demotivate them from trying to become richer. Nor do taxes demotivate the not-yet-rich from trying to become rich. When Bill Gates launched Microsoft in 1975 the top rate of tax was 70%. 
BEN AVELINGSydney 
The time a consumer saves by shopping for groceries online is indeed important (Schumpeter, November 16th). But unlike shopping in a physical store, the customer does not get to select the quality of the food, or more important, get to check the expiry date. Supermarkets have identified the online-delivery channel as one where they can distribute their close-to-out-of-date goods, cleaning out their inventory. 
M.J. FAHERTYLondon 
Regarding the politics of Britain’s National Health Service (“Spin doctors”, November 16th), senior medics are accused of being traditionalists because a lifetime of ethical practice tells us what will work. The ministers in charge have had zero training in the complex interaction between medical science and the management of hospitals and doctors, relying instead on civil servants, who provide them with top-down plans to reform clinical practice. 
The acute problem facing the NHS is a lack of adequate applicants for nursing and paramedical professions. It is no good promising larger hospitals if standards cannot be maintained. School leavers prefer to do a social-science degree rather than join a practical nurse-training scheme, which involves unsocial hours, discipline and the stress of dealing with patients who are often poor, old and sick. 
Other problems include the European Working Time Directive, which abolished the requirement for newly trained doctors to be resident in hospitals in order to gain full registration. The supervisory system that was akin to a firm, where consultants and senior nurses maintain standards and teach doctors and nurses on a designated ward, has been demolished. Doctors leave university with huge debts. Small wonder therefore that, particularly in general practice, trainees opt for limited hours and no home visits. Hence the deluge of patients attending accident and emergency. 
Three measures are needed. First, the reinstitution of pay and accommodation for nurses in training. Second, pilot projects in hospitals where the ward/firm/residents’ mess system can be reintroduced. Third, upping the pre-registration status of qualifying doctors from one to two years, with the second year including six months in A&E and in general practice. 
F.D. SKIDMOREConsultant surgeonLondon 
Increased demand in the NHS is usually put down to ageing, and it does play a role. More important is “supply-led demand”. Constant innovation means that there is more that doctors can do. But many of those innovations lead to what has been described by Alain Enthoven, an economist, as “flat of the curve medicine”: no or minimal improvement at high cost. This is particularly true when we move towards death, with around 20% of health-care budgets being spent on the last year of life. 
Another common mistake is to confuse health care and health. Health care accounts for perhaps 10% of health. Income is the main determinant of health. Spending more on health care crowds out spending on things like housing, education, the environment and benefits, which are more important for health. The NHS doesn’t need more money, it needs a radical rethink. 
RICHARD SMITHFormer editor of the British Medical JournalLondon 
Kit Beazley (Letters, November 23rd) missed the point about wind power. The worry I raised (Letters, November 9th) is that, as wind-turbine towers, foundations and infrastructure get seriously bigger, particularly offshore, are the carbon footprint figures silently getting worse, not better? The projected financial cost per megawatt hour is central to every wind-farm project and is public knowledge. If the projected carbon footprint was published as an equally important figure for every wind-farm globally, all calculated on an agreed basis, we would know, project by project, if we are actually making technical progress or not. It is these detailed numbers that I want the public to have. Then we can have a meaningful conversation on sustainability. 
JIM PLATTSCambridge, Cambridgeshire 
Your article on the Kurt Vonnegut museum (“So it goes”, November 16th) reminded me of his epitaph for the 20th century: “The good Earth—we could have saved it, but we were too damn cheap and lazy.” 
PATRICK LEACHAdjunct facultyColorado School of MinesDenver 
